Socio-Legal Perspectives: Labor Law
Elon University School of Law
Eric M. Fink
5. Collective Bargaining
5.1. Duty to Bargain 
5.1.1. NLRA 
§ 8(a)(5): Employer refusal to bargain 
§ 8(b)(3): Union refusal to bargain 
§ 8(d): Mutual obligation & scope of bargaining
“For the purposes of this section, to bargain collectively is the performance of the mutual obligation of the employer and the representative of the employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in good faith with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment, or the negotiation of an agreement, or any question arising thereunder, and the execution of a written contract incorporating any agreement reached if requested by either party, but such obligation does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession” 
5.1.2. Collective Bargaining & Economic Weapons
NLRB v. Insurance Agents’ International Union (1960)
No ULP where union engages in actions aimed at exerting economic pressure on employer in bargaining
§ 8(b)(3) prohibits bad faith in bargaining
But recourse to economic weapons—even if unprotected as concerted activity—does not necessarily amount to a ULP
Assuming activity is unprotected, employer’s remedy would be discipline or discharge
Good faith: “serious intent to adjust differences and to reach an acceptable common ground”
“presupposes a desire to reach ultimate agreement, to enter into a collective bargaining agreement”
5.1.3. Unilateral Change
NLRB v. Katz (1962)
Employer commits ULP by unilaterally implementing changes in matters that were mandatory subjects of bargaining under § 8(d), and over which parties were in fact bargaining without having reached impasse
Brennan distinguishes Insurance Agents, on ground that union in Insurance Agents did not make any unilateral change, but merely sought to pressure employer to agree to union’s proposals
Rejects employer’s argument that there is no ULP if employer is bargaining in good faith
Unilateral implementation inherently breaches duty to bargain in good faith, because it amounts to a refusal to bargain at all
Congress Hotel case (p. 465, n. 4)
Facts
Employer refused to increase contributions to benefit plans, as demanded by union in negotiations
Plan trustees notified employer that coverage would terminate unless employer reached a contract providing for new minimum contributions
Plan terminated coverage after employer failed to reach agreement with union
Employer placed all bargaining unit employees in the company’s own health plan
ULP?
5.1.4. Impasse
Determining whether parties have reached impasse
Factors (Taft Broadcasting)
bargaining history
good faith of the parties in negotiation
length of negotiation
importance of issues as to which there is disagreement
contemporaneous understanding of the parties as to the state of negotiations
Fact specific, case-by-case determination
Complete or partial impasse
Circuit split
DC, 1st, 6th, & 7th Circuits: require impasse on all issues
5th Circuit: Allows issue-by-issue impasse
5.1.5. Surface Bargaining
NLRB v. American National Ins. Co. (1952)
No ULP where employer proposes management rights clause excluding certain matters from arbitration
As long as the parties bargain in good faith over mandatory subjects, the employer may lawfully demand, and the union may lawfully agree, that certain of those subjects will remain within management’s discretion under a CBA
Duty to bargain is procedural
No obligation to agree, nor to compromise
Board may not impose or prohibit substantive contractual terms under the guise of enforcing the good faith bargaining duty
Query: Does the employer’s motivation in proposing and insisting on a management rights clause matter?
What if employer does so as a tactic to avoid reaching any agreement?
How can you tell?
Query: If union doesn’t want to agree to management rights clause, what are its options?
Hardesty Company, Inc. (2002)
Surface bargaining
“mere pretense at negotiations with a completely closed mind and without a spirit of cooperation”
ULP where “employer will only reach an agreement on its own terms and none other”
“Boulwarism” 
In negotiations with the International Union of Electrical Workers (IUE), GE management presented the company’s “first, last, & best offer”, ostensibly based on calculations to determine the maximum amount the company was willing to pay
NLRB held this was a ULP
5.1.6. Duty to Supply Information
Detroit Edison (1979)
5.1.7. Other Types of Bad Faith
Alan Ritchey, Inc. (2006)
5.1.8. Bargaining During the Contract Term
UAW v. NLRB (1985)
5.2. Subjects of Bargaining
5.2.1. Mandatory Subjects
Fibreboard Paper Products Corp. v. NLRB (1964)
First National Maintenance Corp. v. NLRB (1981)
Dubuque Packing Co. (1993)
Allied Chemical & Alkali Workers Local 1 v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass (1971)
5.3. Bargaining Remedies
5.3.1. Available Remedies
H.K. Porter Co. v. NLRB (1970)

