Socio-Legal Perspectives: Labor Law
Elon University School of Law
Eric M. Fink
3. Concerted Activity, Mutual Aid & Protection, Labor Organizations
3.1. Overview
3.1.1. Statute: NLRA § 7
Employees shall have the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, and shall also have the right to refrain from any or all of such activities except to the extent that such right may be affected by an agreement requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment as authorized in section 158(a)(3) of this title.
3.1.2. Rights under § 7
Self-organization
Form, join, or assist labor organizations
Bargaining collectively through representatives of own choosing
Other concerted activities for purpose of
Collective Bargaining
Other mutual aid or protection
Refrain from any of the above
subject to valid agency shop clause under § 8(a)(3)
3.1.3. Application of § 7 Rights
All statutory employees, regardless of whether they are represented by a union, have rights under § 7
3.1.4. Pre-emptive effect
§ 7 rights prevail over
contrary state/local law
workplace rules 
But union may agree to limitations on exercise of § 7 rights in CBA
e.g. no-strike clause; grievance & arbitration procedure
3.2. Concerted Activity
3.2.1. Definining “Concerted Activity”
Lynd: “Concerted activity” = “solidarity”
3.2.2. Washington Aluminum (DATE)
Collective action by workers, absent union representation & CBA
Where action is motivated by dispute over working conditions
Employees need not have any specific demand
3.2.3. City Disposal Systems (DATE)
Individual refusal to work by employee under union representation & CBA
Where action is based on reasonable & honest belief that he is being asked to do something he is not required to do under the CBA. 
Protection as “concerted activity” does not require collective action, nor filing of formal grievance under CBA
But self-help, where CBA contains grievance procedure, may be a contractual violation
O’Connor dissent:
Would limit “concerted activity” to collective actions by employees
Individual employee, acting in own self-interest, is not engaged in “concerted activity”
3.2.4. Questions
What if, in Washington Aluminum, only one employee refused to work?
What if, in City Disposal, there was no union or CBA?
What if the driver spoke with other driver(s) before refusing to drive the truck?
Employer has a workplace rule prohibiting employees from discussing wages/salaries. Does this violate § 7? What if employer requires each individual employee to sign an individual employment contract a “confidentiality” clause?
Employee, a truck driver, refuses to operate his assigned truck, asserting that the condition of the truck violates applicable safety standards under federal law. The driver is not represented by a union, there is no CBA in place, and the driver does not communicate with any other employees about the issue. Is this “concerted activity” under § 7? (Note that other applicable law may give employee right to refuse to work under unsafe conditions. See, e.g. OSHA; Motor Carrier Act)
3.3. Mutual Aid & Protection
3.3.1. Defining “Mutual Aid & Protection”
Identity: Who does the concerted activity seek to protect?
employees v. others
Subject: What is the object of the concerted activity?
interests as employees v. other interests
3.3.2. Who is Protected?
NLRB v. J. Weingarten (1975)
Right to have union representative present at meeting with employer, where employee reasonably believes the meeting may result in disciplinary action
Limitations
Does not apply where meeting is merely to inform employee of a disciplinary action already decided on
Employee may not insist on a particular representative
Employer is not required to negotiate with representative during the interview
Employer may choose not to conduct interview, rather than do so with union representative present
Right is waivable by the employee and by the union through CBA
IBM Corp. (NLRB 2004)
Reversing Epilepsy Foundation (2000), Board holds Weingarten does not apply in non-union workplace
Rationale:
Dissent:
3.3.3. What is Protected?
Eastex, Inc. v. NLRB (1978)
Facts:
Union distributed newsletter in nonwork areas during nonwork times
Newsletter urged support for union, and encouraged workers to take action to oppose (1) incorporation of “right-to-work” law into state constitution, and (2) Presidential veto of minimum wage increase
Employer refused to permit distribution of newsletter
Argued subject-matter was not within scope of “mutual aid and protection”, because the issues raised did not directly affect the employees in question
“right-to-work” was already the law
employees were paid more than minimum wage
Holding
Newsletter was protected
Protection is not limited to concerted activity aimed at protecting interests as workers “through channels outside the immediate employee-employer relationship”
In this case, concerted activity aimed at political action is protected, where subject-matter relates to workers’ interests as employees
Statutory definition of “employee” (“not  … limited to the employees of a particular employer”) implies that concerted activity is protected even when undertaken to support some other group of employees
But note that Powell assumes the workers involved must have some self-interest at stake.
Workers here had self-interest, at least indirectly, in the issues at stake
Cites economic evidence that minimum wage affects wage rates more generally
Incorporation of “right-to-work” in state constitution would make it more difficult to repeal, and affects workers’ interest in union security (mandatory subject of bargaining in non “right-to-work” states)
Is Powell defining “self-interest” broadly enough to encompass all concerted activity motivated by solidarity with other workers? Or would he deny protection to activity where the workers acting had neither a direct nor indirect personal interest at stake?
See Hendricks County Rural Electric Membership Corp. (NLRB 1978) (holding petition in support of fired employee is protected, because workers signing petition had self-interest in not also being subject to arbitrary discharge), aff’d 454 U.S. 170 (1981).
3.4. Unprotected Conduct
3.4.1. Loss of Protection Based on Nature of Conduct
Timekeeping Systems (1997) 
Employee fired for sarcastic & disrespectful emails
Emails “clearly constituted ‘concerted’ activity”
Aimed at terms & condition of employment (change in vacation policy)
Intended “to incite the other employees” to act
Issue is whether protection is lost because of the tone of the emails
In this case, employee conduct was not “so violent or of such serious character as to render the employee unfit for further service”
Emails didn’t rise to the level of insubordination or disruption of work process
Disparagement of employer’s products/services
Jefferson Standard Broadcasting (US 1953) –  Handbills distributed by picketing (but not striking) workers disparaged employers programming. Unprotected where criticisms were not related to labor practices or working conditions
Patterson-Sargent Co. (NLRB 1956) – Handbills distributed by striking workers claimed quality of paint made by replacement workers was not as good. Unprotected where criticisms were untruthful (in dicta, says would have been unprotected even if true). Dissent would find protected, because workers were on strike and content of handbills was connected to labor dispute.
Breach of confidentiality
Activity may lost protection where employees breach employer confidentiality
But employer’s confidentiality policies may not be so broad as to prohibit or chill discussion of working conditions (e.g. wages)
3.4.2. Loss of Protection Based on Object of Conduct
Eastex suggests “at some point the relationship [between the activity and the worker’s job] becomes so attenuated that an activity cannot failrly be deemed to come within the ‘mutual aid or protection’ clause.”
See Harrah’s Lake Tahoe Resort Casino, (NLRB 1992) – Worker fired after encouraging other employees to take over company through ESOP plan. Unprotected, where directed at interests as owners, not employees.
Not how this decision rests on and reinforces antimony between “employee” and “employer”
3.5. Labor Organization
3.5.1. Statutory Definition: NLRA § 2(5)
The term “labor organization” means any organization of any kind, or any agency or employee representation committee or plan, in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, or conditions of work.
3.5.2. Employer Domination, Support, & Interference
Electromation, Inc. (NLRB 1992)
Crown Cork & Seal (NLRB 2001)
3.5.3. Majority Rule
Minority Unions
ILGWU (Bernhard-Altman Texas Corp.) v. NLRB (US 1961)
3.5.4. Exclusive Representation
Emporium Capwell Co. v. Western Addition Community Org. (US 1975)
